Voici mes commentaires sur ton plan de discussion.
dans l’ensemble: assez riche, c’est bien.
par contre, 
- dans chaque section, il faudrait un peu plus construire une problématique, un argumentaire (attention à éviter la succession de propos non reliés entre eux).
- ne pas juste répéter les conclusions de tes articles ainsi que des éléments de littérature, mais en tirer quelque chose de nouveau  
- plus particuilèrement: bien mettre en valeur la portée de tes résultats
(ce que cela permet de comprendre, à quoi ca peut servir, comment il faudrait procéder à partir de là)

constant drift: -constant Ne
>
Discussion & perspectives
>
  1. Conclusion
-not conclusion, but Summary of main results
- une section ici sur les biais mutationnels? (sur comment exploiter ton article 1 en gros). A mettre plus tard si le temps.
  2. Epistasis and entrenchment
  3. Adaptive landscape
  4. Unifying phylogenetic and population-genetics model
  5. Mechanistic and phenomenological models
  6. Reproducible science
  7. Concluding remarks
>

==


 Conclusion
Summary of main results

• Recall the frame and goals of the thesis (see chapter 5).

• Mutational bias result in fixation bias in the other direction (which can be con-
founded with gBGC).
-bizarre de parler de gBGC dans un résumé de tes résultats, dans lesquels tu n’en parles pas du tout.
• By modeling fixation bias, mutational bias can be inferred reliably.
in the context of classical (i.e. non mechanistic) codon models.

• It is possible to construct and implement models of evolution parameterized by
drift across branch and selection across sites.
• There is persistent signal in substitution patterns that relates to past drift.
• However, assumptions on the properties of the fitness landscape, namely that each
site is independent results in low sensitivity.

je suis réservé sur l’utilisation du mot susceptibilité en dehors du contexte du formalisme mathématique.
pas assez parlant (Laurent D). Response of omega to changes in Ne.
• Susceptibility of dN /dS to changes in Ne is between two extremes, site independent
fitness landscapes, and phenotype define for the whole sequence.
-other conclusions about: a remaining gap between quantitative predictions of biophysical models and 
empirical observations about response of omega to changes in Ne and expression level.


>
 Epistasis and entrenchment
• A blind spot of the mutation-selection phylogenetic codon models
at least those explored here, 
is the assumption of
site-independence,
- this assumption is convenient, both computationally and statistically:
computationally,
each site is an independent Markov chain.
(markov process)
statistically,
can use mixture models (Rodrigue) or penalized likelihood (Tamuri) to estimate site-specific amino-acid fitness profiles 
In contrast:
• From a modeling and inference perspective, accounting for epistasis is challenging
both in terms of parametrization and computational complexity (Rodrigue et al., 2005;
Manhart and Morozov, 2015b).
-Is the main reason why epistatis generally ignored in phylogenetic models, and more particularly in codon models

Empirically, however, 
many reasons to believe that this hypothesis of site-independence is not adequate.
Most notably -biophysics 

et du coup, poser une problématique. Par exemple, dire que cela soulève plusieurs questions:
- What are the consequences of epistatis on the molecular evolutionary process?
- what are the consequences of ignoring epistatis in the contexte of phylogenetic inference?
- How can we ultimately account for epistasis in inference?

• Previous studies have argued that models of molecular evolution should consider
the importance epistasis for its role in speciation, in modulating the rate of adaptation,
and many other factors (Goldstein and Pollock, 2017; Miller et al., 2018).
• I argue that epistasis also has an important role in the response of dN /dS to changes
in Ne , both in terms of susceptibility and dynamic of the response.
• Fundamentally, any model modeling fitness at the site level (without epistasis)
implies a slow dynamic and a strong susceptibility, and adding epistasis to the model
imply a faster dynamic and a weaker susceptibility.
Intuitively, this effect originates in
the fact that each site is to adapt independently to changes in Ne leading to overall
a slow response (substitutions must affect all sites), and a strong susceptibility since
each site will change its position in the fitness landscape. Taking into account epistasis,
the burden of adapting to changes in Ne is shared by more sites, such that all of them
don’t have to switch position.
-bien, tu rappelles le message de l’article 3. Mais qu’as tu à en dire de plus?

je pense que ce serait important de faire le lien avec l’article 2 
tu vois bien une variation du Ne, faible, mais non nulle.
c’est une retraduction sur le Ne de la question du omega dans l’article 3.


je ne vois pas trop l'articulation entre entrenchement et le paragraphe précédent.
• On the other hand, entrenchment due to specific epistasis has implication in terms
of the assumption of a static fitness landscape.
attention: globalement, le paysage est fixe, c’est juste que, en un site, il apparait comme variable.
pourrait être bien précisé.
Fitness landscapes are considered static,
where the current sequence is sitting on the high ground of the fitness landscape, where
by high ground I mean that the gap between peaks and current sequence is on the order
of 1/Ne . With epistasis, fitness landscape is not static but dynamic, and for a specific
site the proposed mutations are mostly from high ground into a fitness valley, where
such valley is getting deeper and deeper with time. In other words the selection coeffi-
cient of proposed mutations are getting increasingly negative with time, mimicking a
dynamic fitness landscape.
>
la structure logique du paragraphe entrenchement n’est pas claire du tout.
et, on peut se demander: finalement, tu veux en venir ou?
là, tu ne fais que réexpliquer le concept d’entrenchement, mais en quoi ca s’articule avec tes résultats?


 Adaptive landscape
• Another blind spot of the mutation-selection is the assumption of a static fitness land-
scape.


ici, il faut un peu élaborer:
- the mut-sel equilibrium under a fixed fitness landscape is essentially a nearly-neutral regime.
-at eq., sequence is close to optimum
-therefore, most mutations are deleterious
-or compensate for previous deleterious mutations that got fixed (previous substitutions).

Thus, conversely:
adaptation can be characterized as a dynamic fitness landscape, or seascape (Mustonen, Lassig).
• With seascape, fitness landscape is not static but dynamic, and for a specific site
the proposed mutations are mostly from high ground into a fitness valley. Because of
the movement of the landscape behind our feet, similarly to a Red-Queen dynamic, it is
more likely to slide into a valley rather than on top of a peak when the landscape moving.
In other words, because the current sequence is at marginal stability, and that they are
more ways to move downward that upwards in the fitness landscape, any changes of the
landscape results in lower elevation of the current coordinate. The resulting dynamic is
that selection pushes the sequence to climb up the landscape constantly.
-this way of formalizing adaptation, or positive selection, is more mechanistic than the classical perspective, in terms of omega>1.
In particular, it is possible to have adaptation without having omega 1 (cet argument est développé dans l’article de Nic)


ouh la la… c’est pas correctement construit tout ca, logiquement parlant:
• This effect translates into a discrepancy between ω and ω0 , where ω ω0 is signature
of adaption (Rodrigue et al., 2016).
-tu ne peux pas vraiment le dire comme cela, directement en termes des paramètres d’un modèle.
dire plutôt: translates into a higher dN/dS than expected if the fitness landscape was fixed.
As a result, the assumption of static landscape can
be turned into an advantage, where ω0 is the null model of absence of adaptive evolution,
in the sens that the fitness landscape is not moving.
-mal dit

This suggests to do the following:
- first, fit a nearly-neutral model (mut-sel at equilibirium)
- calculate the induced dN/dS (call it omega0)
- estimate the dN/dS on the same data (omega)
then if omega omega_0: sign that the gene is under positive selection
It is important to note that because
of the mutation-selection-drift equilibrium is not optimized, their is always of proportion
of advantageous mutation that are proposed.
-oui, mais ca, c’est juste une manière d'expliquer le point plus haut, à savoir, que le dN/dS est plus grand qu’attendu si le paysage est fixe. Donc, pourquoi le mettre ici?
• ω and ω0 can be estimated along the sequence, such that mutation-selection frame-
work can detect site-specific adaptive evolution in protein-coding genes. Such method has
been implemented in Bayescode, and the manuscript is available in appendix page 199.
• Moreover, contrasting ω and ω0 lead to estimation of the rate of adaptive substitu-
tion as:
ωA = ω − ω0
-à revoir..

Peut-être ici, je rajouterais un paragraphe, pour être d’abord plus en rapport avec tes articles de thèse:
- this mut-sel framework for detecting adaptation has been proposed relatively recently.
- still to be applied more broadly to empirical data, and compare it with classical codon models.

- however, in its current form: assumes a constant Ne across the tree.
-this suggests to add omega* (or omega_a) in the mutsel-Ne
would potentially be more effective at detecting positive selection.
Also:  omega* could be allowed to vary across branches, like Ne.
This could have interesting applications:
For instance, do bats, compared to other mammals, have both stronger purifying selection (large Ne)
and stronger positive selection (larger omega*)?


Finally,
• This phylogenetic estimation of the proportion of adaptation can be confronted to
estimation of adaptation obtained with polymorphism dataset within species. Originally
pioneered by McDonald and Kreitman (1991), the ratio of non-synonymous over synony-
mous polymorphism (pN /pS ) supposedly solely contains non-adaptive polymorphism.
On the other hand, divergence data allows to estimate the ratio of non-synonymous over
synonymous substitutions (dN /dS ), supposedly composed of a mixture of both advanta-
geous substitutions and non-adaptive (nearly-neutral) substitutions. Thus the difference
dN /dS − pN /pS is the rate of adaptive evolution.
• To note, the rate of non-adaptive evolution, pN /pS obtained with polymorphism
data supposedly matches the compound parameters ω0 obtained uniquely from divergence
data.
• However, estimation of adaptive rate can be biased by moderately deleterious muta-
tions (Eyre-Walker et al., 2002) and by the change in population size through time (Eyre-
Walker, 2002). To overcome this biases, the method of Galtier (2016) relies on the syn-
onymous and non-synonymous site-frequency spectra (SFS) to estimate the distribution
of fitness effects of mutations (DFE), modeled as a continuous distribution. Subsequent
development of these methods are reviewed in (Moutinho et al., 2019b), intrinsically
measuring the rate of non-adaptive evolution present in polymorphism data.
• From the availability of divergence and polymorphism data, it is now possible
to ask whether the rate of non-adaptive evolution measured by phylogenetic mutation-
selection models matches the rate estimated from SFS. Are phylogenetic codon models
(both mechanistic and classical) for detecting positive selection
and population-genetics models independently estimating the same parameters?
the same parameters? ou plutôt the same genes?


>
Unifying phylogenetic and population-genetics model
• Along this manuscript, polymorphism inside species has not been leveraged. Can we
unify phylogenetic and population-genetics model?
Doing that would be useful, for several reasons.
• Selection is more easily detectable in substitution, while mutation bias is more easily
detectable in polymorphism (SFS). Unless they are carefully articulated, see chapter 6.
Hence to disentangle the gBGC for example, integrated phylogenetic and population-
genetics methods should be devised.
• Also, the availability of intra-specific diversity across taxa, allow to align orthologous
protein coding DNA sequence across and within species.
-so what?

• Example of integration between phylogeny and population genetics in the context
of a DFE in Wilson et al. (2011).
• Example of integration using scaling properties of the evolutionary process (De
Maio et al., 2013; Schrempf et al., 2016; Bergman et al., 2018; Schrempf et al., 2019) able
to disentangle gBGC and mutational bias (Borges et al., 2019; Borges and Kosiol, 2020).

• Because mechanistic codon models are based on population-genetics first principles,
they can theoretically be
naturally
extended to account for within
taxa
-species
diversity.
• The strategy can be to augment molecular divergence data between species with
information about molecular polymorphism within species.
• Such attempt has been tried during the first year of the PhD, where the for-
malism, based on Poisson Random fields can be found in appendices page 198. The
methods has found to be rather straightforward to implement into BayesCode, extend-
ing mutation-selection formalism.
• First, it was found to be computationally intensive, even though optimizing the
computation with sufficient statistics. Secondly, the method provided sensible estima-
tion of diversity (θ = 4Neu) based on generated simulation under Wright-Fisher model
of evolution (SimuPoly).

Most importantly,
However,
the assumption of constant drift along the
phylogeny assumed by mutation-selection codon models was arguably the strongest as-
sumption to relax in such context.
In other words,
what sense would it make to integrate
why integrating polymorphism and
diversity in extant species
that generally have quite different levels of diversity
if Ne is considered constant along the phylogeny.
This was
It was his-
torically the reason to extend phylogenetic site-specific mutation-selection codon models
by incorporating branch-specific Ne presented in chapter 7.
• After extending mutation-selection with branch specific drift, we actually realized
that the susceptibility of substitution rate to changes in Ne is too strong because of
site-independence assumption (chapter 8), effectively amortizing the range of Ne which
could be inferred.
• Hence, even tough site- and branch-specific mutation-selection phylogenetic codon
models can be extended by incorporating signal of polymorphism, which actually has
been implemented in Bayescode (-p option).
• Based on these observations, I believe it is not yet the path forward to build an
unified phylogenetic and population-genetics model.
>
 Mechanistic and phenomenological models

présenter d’abord la problématique

• In order to reduce the complexity of mechanistic models, analytical models could allow
to relate microscopic parameters of protein coding sequences to macroscopic parameters
of evolution in a similar fashion of chapter 8. Subsequently, the microscopic parame-
ters can be inferred from divergence and polymorphism data, and compared to their
experimental estimation.
• The methodology can be found in Brevet and Lartillot (2019).
